---
layout: post
title: A short post regarding fig. 4G-H
date: 2024-04-19 11:12:00-0400
description: Authors' notes on readers' questions regarding fig. 4H
tags: Explanation Results
categories: Q&A
related_posts: false
giscus_comments: true
---
Since the publication of our paper, we have received many constructive feedbacks and questions. I decided to provide answers to
some of the questions here so more people will be benefit from those important questions. 


Some people asked about fig. 4H in the original [paper](http://127.0.0.1:4000/RippleTagging/Paper/), in particular, what exactly is shown on the x and y axes?

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/QA/fig4_GH.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Fig.1 Panel G and H of fig.4 from our original paper.
</div>




I have made a diagram to explain fig. 4G and 4H. There are two components: 
<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/QA/explaine_fig4_H.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Fig.2 Diagram to explain results in fig.4G-H. Note, this figure is just to illustrate how we performed the analysis (not real data).
</div>

1. First, we plotted bar graphs for the distribution 
of replays across trial blocks (panel A and B in the diagram, corresponds to fig. 4G in the paper) for each individual recording session.


2. Then, we build the scatter plot showing the correlation between *maze*{: style="color: #ec7aca; font-size: 1.5rem;" } and
*post-sleep*{: style="color: #890eb9; font-size: 1.5rem;" } replay patterns pooled from all data
points in all sessions (panel C in the diagram, corresponds to fig. 4H in the paper). To further explain how those two components are
related to each other: 


- For each trial block in each example session, we took its replay proportion (#of replay in a particular 
trial block / total # of replay in that session) during *maze*{: style="color: #ec7aca"} as x-axis value and replay proportion
during *post-sleep*{: style="color: #890eb9; font-size: 1.5rem;" } as y-axis
value of the summary scatter plot (panel C here and fig. 4H in the paper). 

  - To give a concrete example, suppose the trial block 5-10 in example session 1 accounts 
  for 100% of the maze replays in that session, and that same trial block also accounts for 100% of the post-sleep replays (panel A),
  then this data point would locate at the (1,1) coordinate of the summary plot in panel C.

  - The example data point in panel B
  follows the same logic.


- Note that proportion values (y-axis values in A and B) are **normalized** (scaled between 0 and 1)
so that they can be compared across sessions. 
 


---
We had very limited space to explain all our interesting results in detail in the original paper. I hope the explanation here helps!

Further feedbacks in general (including hot takes and criticisms) are welcome! (I love hot takes)! Feel free to leave a comment here or email us (winnieyangwn96@gmail.com,
Gyorgy.Buzsaki@nyulangone.org).